---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Reflecting on Coding Standards"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-09-23
published: true
labels:
  - Coding Conventions
---

Coding standards are often overlooked or seen as unimportant because they are usually associated with trivial rules, like brace placement or other stylistic naming conventions. 
However, coding standards can serve as a foundation for learned quality and effective collaboration within programming. Adopting the use of coding standards in both professional and personal environments allows for improved quality in the software you develop, and the increased readability of your work, promoting a heightened understanding of the languages you use.

As a student immersed in a university environment, the use of coding conventions and standards allows us to learn the language with more efficiency and accuracy before we enter the workforce. Adhering to a set of coding conventions after covering the basics of a language ensures we internalize best practices, so that we can consistently have readable, functional code. It is far less likely that we will encounter unsolvable bugs, or massive inconsistencies within our programming if we use descriptive variable names, proper function construction, and correctly formatted blocks of code. The practice of consistent convention solidifies our understanding of the language we are learning, and cements the ability to effectively communicate our intent and ideation through code, which is vital to mastery of the language, and in professional or collaborative pursuits in the future.

This week we were introduced to ESLint, and completed different practice WOD’s using it. I enjoyed the impact it had on my coding consistency while working on these problems. ESLint is a valuable tool as it enforces its coding conventions, as well as detecting any errors within the written software, forcing you to maintain consistent code quality. In the first assignment where we were using ESLint to fix bad typescript, the amount of errors, warnings and suggestions were pretty overwhelming. However, once I got into resolving the issues one by one, I realized how powerful this tool is, as knowing exactly what is wrong, and the why behind it, cements my own knowledge of the language.
Constantly correcting errors and warnings can be tedious, especially in much larger projects where there is a lot of code, but it is useful to be held to a standard of code quality and best practices within your development environment. In larger projects, having variables that aren’t called, or formatting that is inconsistent, can cause significant issues down the line, and cause bugs in your software. The use of ESLint is a beneficial practice for me to take with me into future projects, and my learning of the language currently, even if the initial warnings are painful to solve consistently. Errors are unavoidable, nobody writes perfect code 100% of the time, and ESLint can help those errors to become teaching moments, reinforcing consistent learning and improvement.

Coding conventions and ESLint essentially enforce consistency within the code you write. Having consistent conventions and readable code, allows for collaboration with other developers, or even for yourself to look back on things you did years ago, and understand the code easily. Personally I have projects from a few years ago that I would struggle to read now, which really shows the importance of adhering to conventions. 
Outside of the learning environment we are in right now, having clear coding conventions and communication is crucial for larger teams and open source projects, which we, as developers, will experience when we enter the workforce. Having these conventions and clear code allows everyone to spend time improving functionality, fixing issues, and collaborating with each other, instead of spending time trying to decipher unclear code. 
Consistency and conventions are crucial to the longevity and maintenance of code, allowing for faster understanding, and acceleration of the development process.  

Coding conventions are an essential tool for both learning languages and developing professional projects. There are clear and essential benefits to adhering to standards, and they transcend just basic style preferences. Standards enable programmers to produce high-quality, maintainable and understandable code that allows for both collaboration and consistent learning. It is clear that using coding conventions lays the foundation for successful projects, mastery of the language, and for developers to be innovative and creative, while maintaining comprehensibility.
